---
title: "Problem Set 1"
notoc: true
---

> Source: [Section 1 of Gathmann](https://www.mathematik.uni-kl.de/~gathmann/class/alggeom-2019/alggeom-2019-c1.pdf)

# Problem Set 1 

:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.19"}
Prove that every affine variety $X\subset \AA^n/k$ consisting of only finitely many points can be written as the zero locus of $n$ polynomials.

> Hint: Use interpolation. 
  It is useful to assume at first that all points in $X$ have different $x_1\dash$coordinates.

:::

:::{.solution}
Let $X = \ts{\vector p_1, \cdots, \vector p_d} =\ts{\vector p_j}_{j=1}^d$, where each $\vector p_j\in \AA^n$ can be written in coordinates 
$$\vector p_j \da \thevector{p_j^1, p_j^2, \cdots, p_j^n}.$$

:::{.remark}
Proof idea: for some fixed $k$ with $2\leq k \leq n$, consider the pairs $(p_j^1, p_j^k) \in \AA^2$.
  Letting $j$ range over $1\leq j \leq d$ yields $d$ points of the form $(x, y) \in \AA^2$, so construct an interpolating polynomial such that $f(x) = y$ for each tuple.
Then $f(x) - y$ vanishes at every such tuple.

\

Doing this for each $k$ (keeping the first coordinate always of the form $p_j^1$ and letting the second coordinate vary) yields $n-1$ polynomials in $k[x_1, x_k] \subseteq \kx{n}$, then adding in the polynomial $p(x) = \prod_j (x-p_j^1)$ yields a system the vanishes precisely on $\ts{\vector p_j}$.
:::


:::{.claim}
Without loss of generality, we can assume all of the first components $\ts{p_j^1}_{j=1}^d$ are distinct.
:::

\todo[inline]{Todo: follows from "rotation of axes"?}

We will use the following fact:

:::{.theorem title="Lagrange"}
Given a set of $d$ points $\ts{(x_i, y_i)}_{i=1}^d$ with all $x_i$ distinct, there exists a unique polynomial of degree $d$ in $f \in k[x]$ such that $\tilde f(x_i) = y_i$ for every $i$.

This can be explicitly given by
\[  
\tilde f(x) = \sum_{i=1}^d y_i \qty{\prod_{\substack{0\leq m \leq d \\ m\neq i}} \qty{x - x_m \over x_i - x_m }}
.\]

Equivalently, there is a polynomial $f$ defined by $f(x_i) = \tilde f(x_i) - y_i$ of degree $d$ whose roots are precisely the $x_i$.
:::

\vspace{2em}

Using this theorem, we define a system of $n$ polynomials in the following way:

- Define $f_1 \in k[x_1] \subseteq k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ by $$f_1(x) = \prod_{i=1}^d \qty{x - p_i^1}.$$
  Then the roots of $f_1$ are precisely the first components of the points $p$. 
  
  \

- Define $f_2 \in k[x_1, x_2] \subseteq k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ by considering the ordered pairs $$\ts{(x_1, x_2) = (p_j^1, p_j^2)},$$ then taking the unique Lagrange interpolating polynomial $\tilde f_2$ satisfying $\tilde f_2(p_j^1) = p_j^2$ for all $1\leq j \leq d$.
  Then set $f_2 \da \tilde f_2(x_1) - x_2 \in k[x_1, x_2]$.

\

- Define $f_3 \in k[x_1, x_3] \subseteq k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ by considering the ordered pairs $$\ts{(x_1, x_3) = (p_j^1, p_j^3)},$$ then taking the unique Lagrange interpolating polynomial $\tilde f_3$ satisfying $\tilde f_2(p_j^1) = p_j^3$ for all $1\leq j \leq d$.
  Then set $f_3 \da \tilde f_3(x_1) - x_3 \in k[x_1, x_3]$.

- $\cdots$

\vspace{2em}
 
Continuing in this way up to $f_n \in k[x_1, x_n]$ yields a system of $n$ polynomials.

\

:::{.proposition}
$V(f_1, \cdots, f_n) = X$.
:::

:::{.proof}

:::{.claim}
$X\subseteq V(f_i)$:
:::
This is essentially by construction.
Letting $p_j\in X$ be arbitrary, we find that 
\[  
f_1(p_j) 
= \prod_{i=1}^d \qty{p_j^1 - p_i^1}
= (p_j^1 - p_j^1) \prod_{\substack{i\leq d \\ i\neq j}} \qty{p_j^1 - p_i^1} = 0
.\]

Similarly, for $2\leq k \leq n$,
\[  
f_k(p_j) = \tilde f_k(p_j^1) - p_j^k = 0 
,\]
which follows from the fact that $\tilde f_k(p_j^1) = p_j^k$ for every $k$ and every $j$ by the construction of $\tilde f_k$.

:::{.claim}
$X^c \subseteq V(f_i)^c$:
:::

This follows from the fact the polynomials $f$ given by Lagrange interpolation are unique, and thus the roots of $\tilde f$ are unique.
But if some other point was in $V(f_i)$, then one of its coordinates would be another root of some $\tilde f$.


:::

:::


:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.21"}
Determine $\sqrt{I}$ for 
\[  
I\da \gens{x_1^3 - x_2^6,\, x_1 x_2 - x_2^3} \normal \CC[x_1, x_2]
.\]
:::

:::{.solution}
For notational purposes, let $\mathcal{I}, \mathcal{V}$ denote the maps in Hilbert's Nullstellensatz, we then have 
$$(\mathcal{I} \circ \mathcal{V})(I) = \sqrt{I}.$$

So we consider $\mathcal{V}(I) \subseteq \AA^2/\CC$, the vanishing locus of these two polynomials, which yields the system
\[  
\begin{cases}
x^3 - y^6 & = 0 \\
xy - y^3 & = 0.
\end{cases}
\]
In the second equation, we have $(x- y^2)y = 0$, and since $\CC[x, y]$ is an integral domain, one term must be zero.

1. If $y=0$, then $x^3 = 0 \implies x= 0$, and thus $(0, 0) \in \mathcal{V}(I)$, i.e. the origin is contained in this vanishing locus.

2. Otherwise, if $x-y^2 = 0$, then $x=y^2$, with no further conditions coming from the first equation.


Combining these conditions, $$P\da \ts{(t^2, t) \suchthat t\in \CC} \subset \mathcal{V}(I).$$

  where $I = \gens{x^3 - y^6, xy-y^3}$.

We have $P = \mathcal{V}(I)$, and so taking the ideal generated by $P$ yields
\[  
\qty{\mathcal{I} \circ \mathcal{V}} (I) = \mathcal{I}(P) = \gens{y-x^2} \in \CC[x ,y]
\]

and thus $\sqrt{I} = \gens{y-x^2}$.

:::


:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.22"}
Let $X\subset \AA^3/k$ be the union of the three coordinate axes.
Compute generators for the ideal $I(X)$ and show that it can not be generated by fewer than 3 elements.
:::

:::{.solution}
**Claim**: \[I(X) = \gens{x_2 x_3,\, x_1 x_3,\, x_1 x_2}.\]

We can write $X = X_1 \union X_2 \union X_3$, where

- The $x_1\dash$axis is given by $X_1 \da V(x_2 x_3)$
  $\implies I(X_1) = \gens{x_2 x_3}$,
- The $x_2\dash$axis is given by $X_2 \da V(x_1 x_3)$
  $\implies I(X_2) = \gens{x_1 x_3}$,
- The $x_3\dash$axis is given by $X_3 \da V(x_1 x_2)$
  $\implies I(X_3) = \gens{x_1 x_2}$.

Here we've used, for example, that
$$I(V(x_2 x_3)) = \sqrt{\gens{x_2 x_3}} = \gens{x_2 x_3}$$ 
by applying the Nullstellensatz and noting that $\gens{x_2x_3}$ is radical since it is generated by a squarefree monomial.

We then have
\[  
I(X) &= I(X_1 \union X_2 \union X_3) \\
&= I(X_1) \intersect I(X_2) \intersect I(X_3) \\
&= \sqrt{I(X_1) + I(X_2) + I(X_3)} \\
&= \sqrt{\gens{x_2, x_3} + \gens{x_1 x_3} + \gens{x_1 x_2}} \\
&= \sqrt{\gens{x_2x_3,\, x_1 x_3,\, x_1 x_2}} \hspace{8em}\text{since } \gens{a} + \gens{b} = \gens{a, b} \\
&= {\gens{x_2x_3,\, x_1 x_3,\, x_1 x_2}}
,\]
where in the last equality we've again used the fact that an ideal generated by squarefree monomials is radical. 

:::{.claim}
$I(X)$ can not be generated by 2 or fewer elements.

Let $J\da I(X)$ and $R\da k[x_1, x_2, x_3]$, and toward a contradiction, suppose $J = \gens{r, s}$.
Define $\mfm \da \gens{x, y, z}$ and
a quotient map $$\pi: J \to J/\mfm J$$
and consider the images $\pi(r), \pi(s)$.

\
Note that $J/\mfm J$ is an $R/\mfm\dash$module, and since $R/\mfm \cong k$, $J/\mfm J$ is in fact a $k\dash$vector space.
Since $\pi(r), \pi(s)$ generate $J/\mfm J$ as a $k\dash$module, 
$$\dim_k J/\mfm J \leq 2.$$

\
But this is a contradiction, since we can produce 3 $k\dash$linearly independent elements in $J/\mfm J$: namely $\pi(x_1 x_2), \pi(x_1 x_3), \pi(x_2 x_3)$. 
Suppose there exist $\alpha_i$ such that
\[  
\alpha_1 \pi(x_1 x_2) + \alpha_2 \pi(x_1 x_3) + \alpha_3 \pi(x_2 x_3) = 0 \in J/\mfm J \iff
\alpha_1 x_1 x_2 + \alpha_2 x_1 x_3 + \alpha_3 x_2 x_3 \in \mfm J
,\]

But we can then note that 
\[  
\mfm J = \gens{x_1, x_2. x_3}\gens{x_1 x_2, x_1 x_3, x_2 x_3} = 
\gens{x_1^2 x_2,\, x_1^2 x_3,\, x_1x_2 x_3, \cdots}
.\]
can't contain any nonzero elements of degree $d<3$, so no such $\alpha_i$ can exist and these elements are $k\dash$linearly independent.


:::

:::



:::{.exercise title="Gathmann 1.23: Relative Nullstellensatz"}
Let $Y\subset \AA^n/k$ be an affine variety and define $A(Y)$ by the quotient 
\[  
\pi: k[x_1,\cdots, x_n] \to A(Y) \da k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]/I(Y)
.\]

a. Show that $V_Y(J) = V(\pi^{-1}(J))$ for every $J\normal A(Y)$.

b. Show that $\pi^{-1} (I_Y(X)) = I(X)$ for every affine subvariety $X\subseteq Y$.

c. Using the fact that $I(V(J)) \subset \sqrt{J}$ for every $J\normal k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$, deduce that $I_Y(V_Y(J)) \subset \sqrt{J}$ for every $J\normal A(Y)$.

  Conclude that there is an inclusion-reversing bijection
  \[  
  \correspond{\text{Affine subvarieties}\\ \text{of } Y} \iff \correspond{\text{Radical ideals} \\ \text{in } A(Y)}
  .\]
  

:::


\newpage
:::{.exercise title="Extra"}
Let $J \normal k[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ be an ideal, and find a counterexample to $I(V(J)) =\sqrt{J}$ when $k$ is not algebraically closed.
:::


:::{.solution}
Take $J = \gens{x^2+1} \normal \RR[x]$, noting that $J$ is nontrivial and proper but $\RR$ is not algebraically closed.
Then $V(J) \subseteq \RR$ is empty, and thus $I(V(J)) = I(\emptyset)$.


:::{.claim}
$I(V(J)) = \RR[x]$.

Checking definitions, for any set $X \subset \AA^n/k$ we have
\[  
I(X) = \ts{f\in \RR[x] \st \forall x\in X,\, f(x)=0} \\
\]
and so we vacuously have
\[
I(\emptyset) = \ts{f\in \RR[x] \st \forall x\in \emptyset,\, f(x)=0}
= \ts{f\in \RR[x]} = \RR[x]
.\]
:::


:::{.claim}
$\sqrt{J} \neq \RR[x]$.

This follows from the fact that maximal ideals are radical, and $\RR[x]/ J \cong \CC$ being a field implies that $J$ is maximal.
In this case $\sqrt{J} = J \neq \RR[x]$.

\
That maximal ideals are radical follows from the fact that if $J\normal R$ is maximal, we have $J \subset \sqrt{J} \subset R$ which forces $\sqrt{J} = J$ or $\sqrt{J}=R$.

\
But if $\sqrt{J}=R$, then 
\[  
1\in \sqrt{J} \implies 1^n \in J \text{ for some }n \implies 1 \in J \implies J=R
,\]
contradicting the assumption that $J$ is maximal and thus proper by definition.
:::


:::




